# CS 199 Even More Practice

Slides for CS 199 Even More Practice Using [Marp](https://marp.app/).

The `html` files are generated from the `markdown` files, so don't edit the html files but just edit the markdown files and github actions will automatically make the html files.

You can find the [homepage](https://cs199emp.netlify.app/) here.

Pull Requests welcome. 

Powered with fancy automation via Github actions and Netlify.

## Contributing

1. `git pull` - Load up whatever's done so far. Sometimes this will include autogenerated slide files in the `dist/` folder.

2. The `slides/` folder has the slides in the format `sem/YYYY-MM-DD.md`, make sure to create/edit the right one. `template.md` can be a good starting point. `sem` will be in the format `f20`, `s21` etc.

3. Make sure `index.html` has a link to `/dist/sem/YYYY-MD-DD.html`. It's fine if the file doesn't exist yet (it will be autogenerated) just make sure to include it so that viewers can actually see it.

## Inspiration

The homepage also lists EMP slides and recordings from previous semesters. The course format doesn't change too drastically so feel free to use those as starting points for inspiration.

## Locally Using marp

If you want to do this you can, but the CI will automatically take care of it so you don't have to.

1. Install it (assuming you have `npm`)

```bash
npm install -g @marp-team/marp-cli
```

2. To convert
```bash
marp -I slides/ --output dist/
```
## Notes

There are two copies of f20 html files in `dist/` (before the folder structure) to ensure old links don't break.
