---
marp: true
title: 6 Octover 2020
---

# <!-- fit --> CS 199 EMP

## <!-- fit --> Even More Practice

---

# 2 meetings every week Tuesday and Thursday

* Early CST - Early risers and Eastern timezones

* Evening CST - Western timezones (and really late Eastern folks)

* Calendar contains zoom links

* Attend 10 ones for credit. 

---

# Format

* 3 practice problems every session

* focused on practical understanding of concepts covered recently in class

* slides and material available after class

--- 

# How to follow along

* Small breakout rooms of working together 

* Work for 10-15 minutes together, feel free to use paper, whiteboards, online share tools.

* Use the code playground on the 125 homepage for the interactive running

---

# <!-- fit --> Polymorphism Casting

---

```java
public class Book { }
public class Fiction extends Book { }
public class Romance extends Fiction { } 
```

* Up casting is *going up* the inheritance chain. 

* `Romance` can be cast up to `Fiction`, `Book`, `Object`. `Fiction` can be cast up to `Book` and `Object`

* Everything can basically be cast into an `Object` since everything inherits from that

---

* Upcasting will always work without any errors (no need for if conditions or anything)

* You lose out on the all the variables and methods from the cast you convert from. For example going from `Fiction` to `Book` you will still have access to all of Book's variables and methods, but not the ones that exist in `Fiction` that don't exist in `Book`

```java
Romance prideAndPrejudice = new Romance();
Fiction f = prideAndPrejudice; // Upcast Romance -> Fiction
Object o = f; // Upcast Fiction -> Book
```

---

* Downcasting is the opposite, *going down* the inheritance chain.

* May cause errors without proper checking.

* Doing this gives access to variables and methods of the new converted class.

---

1. Check if possible using `variable instanceof Class`

2. Use type casting operator `(ClassName)` before a variable to downcast.

```java
Romance prideAndPrejudice = new Romance();
Object o = prideAndPrejudice; // up cast
if (o instanceof Fiction) { // if you don't check you _may_ get an error
  Fiction f = (Fiction) o; 
}
```
---

* Flow typing is a fancy syntax for type casting.

* This code is equivalent to the last slide. 

* You can add a new variable name of the converted type like `variable instanceof ClassName newVar` and `newVar` is of type `ClassName` if it true.

```java
Romance prideAndPrejudice = new Romance();
Object o = prideAndPrejudice; // up cast
if (o instanceof Fiction f) { // if you don't check you _may_ get an error
  // ...
}
```
---

# <!-- fit --> Equals
---

# <!-- fit --> Calling other constructors

`super`, `this` etc.

Spoilers

---

1)

---

2)

---

3)