---
marp: true
title: 29 Oct 2020
---

# <!-- fit --> CS 199 EMP

## <!-- fit --> Even More Practice

---

# <!-- fit --> Attendance Link:

https://forms.gle/8yto1LvJ4hntiKNu7

---

# 2 meetings every week Tuesday and Thursday

* Early CST - Early risers and Eastern timezones

* Evening CST - Western timezones (and really late Eastern folks)

* Calendar contains zoom links

* Attend 10 sessions for credit, attendence via google form.

---

# Format

* 3 practice problems every session

* focused on practical understanding of concepts covered recently in class

* slides and material available after both sessions

--- 

# How to follow along:

* Small breakout rooms of working together 

* Work for 10-15 minutes together, feel free to use paper, whiteboards, online share tools.

* Use the code playground on the 125 homepage for the interactive running

---
# Review: Maps
* Arguably the most helpful data structure to use in any technical interview! Get used to using them, your life will be better!
* If you've used python before, theese are also known as dictionaries.
* They are most usefull for when you want to acess a value based on some other unique key value. Examples include:
  * Your friends, and what their favorite color is
  * Words in a book, and what their part of speech is
  * Store products, and how many of each is in stock
* each key maps to **exactly one** values

Documentation: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/Map.html

---
# Problem 1: Number List
Given an integer, represent it as a List object, for example:
* input: 12345
* output: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
* hint: remember what "%" means?

```java
List<Integer> NumberList(int num) {
}

```


---
# Problem 2: More with Maps
Given a map of your friends and their favorite colors, return a list of all the friends with the same favoite color

```java
List<String> SharedFavoriteColor(String color,  Map<String, String> friendsToColors;) {
}
```

---
# Hashing

```java
@Override public int hashCode() {
  return Objects.hash(x, y, z);
}
```

* (From Lecture) A hash function is any function that can be used to map data of arbitrary size to fixed-size values.
* Every input in a hash function should produce a unique hash, otherwise, we have a **hash collision**
  * Birthday Paradox
  * The larger the hash, the less likley we are to have hash collisions (exponential)
  * For refference, Git uses a 160 bit hash function

---
# Problem 3: Two Sum, but faster
* A few weeks ago, i introduced you to the infamous two sum interview question
* The runtime of the algorithim you gave was O(n^2). Let's try to make it faster with a hashmap.
  * Given an array of integers nums and an integer target, return indices of the two numbers such that they add up to target.
  * assume that the array has only one solution
  * You may not use the same element twice.
  * Order of the return indecies does not mattter
* Don't forget to give the runtime!

```Java
  import java.util.HashMap;
  public int[] twoSum(int[] nums, int target) {
        
  }
```

---

#  <!-- fit --> Solutions 
## <!-- fit --> (no peeking, it's for your own good!)

---
## <!-- fit --> (no seriously, attempt the problems with your groupmates first!)

---
### 1)


---
### 2)
```Java

```

---
### 3)
```Java
 public int[] twoSum(int[] nums, int target) {
        HashMap <Integer, Integer> compliment_map  = new HashMap<Integer, Integer>();
        int complement;

        // current + compliment = target
        for (int i = 0; i<nums.length; i++) {
            int current = nums[i];
            complement = target - nums[i];
         
            if (compliment_map.containsKey(complement)) {
                return new int[] {i, compliment_map.get(complement)};
            }
          
            compliment_map.put(nums[i], i);
        }

        return [];
  }

```
source: https://medium.com/@jhng2525/leetcode-two-sum-problem-solution-java-7ccb7a01fb3a
